so um
all right so let's uh start talking
about some math
um
so there was a last uh result i was
going to prove um for series which is
that if you have an absolutely
convergent series then
and you rearrange it then um that series
is also absolutely convergent and
converges to the same thing as the
um unarranged series but i'm going to
leave that to the lecture notes and
we're just going to start on a new topic
um so the topic uh
um
that we're now on is uh
continuous functions
and
so continuous functions as we'll see
it's a
it's a statement about how a function
behaves near a point
um
in relation to how it behaves at the
point okay
now what it means for a function to
behave near a point that's uh the notion
of
the limit of the function
which is what we'll first discuss
okay
now
um
[Music]
at what points are we going to be
looking at so so this is um you know
where limits take place and somehow we
want to look at a function near a point
uh near points where
there's a lot of a set nearby to
actually look at f at so f is usually
defined on some set s
and we want to look at points so that
there's a lot of s nearby and we kind of
already dealt with these types of points
when we
encountered cluster points in the
assignment so this is exactly where we
start looking at limits so
[Music]
this is a definition that i'll recall
from the assignment
it has to be a subset of r
and x and r
you say x
is a
cluster point of s
if
we're all delta positive
the interval x minus delta x plus delta
intersect s take away x
is non-empty
okay
so the new uh
terminology not so new uh since we dealt
with it in the assignment is that of a
cluster point
and another way to say this is that
so an equivalent way of stating this is
that
for all delta positive
there exists let's say a y
in
s
such that
0 is bigger than x minus y
is less than delta
okay
so what this means is that
um
you know as far as a picture goes
x is a cluster point if when i ever take
any kind of small interval about it i
can find
um
some s in there other than
you know possibly x
and this should be able to be done for
every interval
so
let's uh
let's take a look at some examples
let's say we take s to be
one over n
in the natural number
okay
and so uh
since now i actually have people in
front of me
i can actually ask questions
so um
whoever first says it what would be a a
cluster point of this set s
so what would be a point in the real
numbers so that there's a lot of s near
it
feel free to blurt it out if it comes to
you
or just take a guess
one so that's one uh
um
possibility so
there has to be a lot of s
near this uh
proposed cluster point so here's so let
me mark out the points that we have
there's uh
zero and then a half is there and then a
third
fourth
fifth
six so on and so on
and so
i see a guess of zero so that's uh
that's a good guess as well
so why would one maybe not be a cluster
point well it's because if i draw
a little interval around one
then there's only one point in s in here
and it's the proposed cluster point one
okay so remember what we should be able
to do is find in every small interval
uh sum of s
in the interval that's not equal to the
point okay and we can't do that for
the point one but for zero if we draw
any
interval around zero
there's plenty of s
in the interval not equal to zero
okay
so here
zero is a cluster point
s
and let's give a
quick proof of this
um so we have to verify for every delta
positive this uh interval 0 minus delta
0 plus delta intersect s take away 0 is
not empty so
the delta v positive
and now here's the picture
here's zero
here's delta
minus delta we have to show that there's
some s in here so we simply choose
natural number n large enough so that
one over n
is there and we can always do this
because of the archimedean uh property
of the real numbers right
so let delta be positive
choose
natural number n
so that
one over n is less than delta and it's
certainly bigger than zero since uh
n is a natural number
then one over n
is in
x minus a delta x plus delta
intersect s take away
zero so this should have been zero
which implies this set is uh non-z
non-empty
because it has something in it
okay
all right was that uh example okay did
y'all uh get that all right
okay so feel free to to
you know ask questions as they come up
um
so let's do another example this one i
will not give a proof of um
full proof of
but we'll just kind of talk our way
through it
um
let's say s is now the open interval
zero one
um
what is the set of cluster points of
zero one
equal to
so what would be a a reasonable guess
for
any guess
so yeah so certainly uh this will
contain zero one right
since uh so zero one everything between
zero and one should be a cluster point
of zero and one because there's always a
lot of numbers uh i mean there's a lot
of numbers between zero and one so
if i draw this
zero one
kind of everything uh in between zero
one is certainly
uh a cluster point what about the point
one
is that a cluster point of this set
it that's a that's a good uh good
observation that yeah it's the soup of
this set so for every
right so um
you know so for every uh
delta positive if i draw a little
interval around one there's going to be
a number
less than one that's bigger than one
minus delta right
the set of cluster points of the open
interval zero one is the closed interval
zero one
okay
now
let's do another
example
let's say we look at now
set of rational numbers
so you should again think of cluster
points as
being the set of points where
there is a lot of this set nearby
okay
now what is the set of cluster points of
the rational numbers
okay so so
perhaps it will con contain the
irrational numbers so let's uh think
about this for a little bit so for
example let's look at square root of two
okay perfectly good rational number i
mean irrational number if i draw a
little interval around square root of
two
can i find
a rational number in there that's not
equal to square root of two
right because we have this theorem about
the density of the rational numbers
right
that we have so
remember that uh
so this was a theorem we proved at one
point for all x y
real numbers with x less than y
there exists an rational number r
such that x is less than r is less than
y
right
so we can always find a rational number
here or we could have taken another
rational number here
yeah
so for every interval we draw around
square root of 2 we can find a rational
in there
uh not equal to square root of 2
obviously but we can find a rational in
that interval yeah
so this suggests that the the set of
cluster points contains the set of
irrationals what about rational numbers
are those also cluster points
let's say i take zero
now i look at a small interval around
zero
can i find a rational number in there
other than zero
i'm not asking like you know actually
giving me one i'm just saying is it that
does there exist a rational number in
this interval other than zero
by this by this theorem right
we can also use the theorem to find
a rational in this interval as well so
no matter if it's square root of 2 or
any irrational number
no matter if it's a rational number uh
everything is a cluster point so the set
of cluster points of rational numbers is
equal to r
okay
is that clear
okay feel free to stop me if you have
any questions so um
now let's look at uh for example s
equal to just a single
guy say zero okay
remember
cluster points of the set means there's
a lot of that set nearby
now i claim that this guy has no
cluster points
because if you think uh so intuitively
why is this this is because for
something to be a cluster point it has
to have a lot of the set near it
a lot
and there's not a lot of set to begin
with there's just one element
so let's uh let's see why this is the
case okay
um and this gives us a chance to negate
the definition of cluster point which is
always a good idea
okay
um so
s equals uh just the singleton set 0
this has no cluster points and so the
negation of the definition of a cluster
point so x
is
not
buster point
s
means
if
this is some bad delta remember so the
definition of cluster point is a for all
delta so
um
negation means there exists one bad
delta so that
x minus delta zero
x plus delta zero
intersect s take away x
equals the empty set
okay
so the picture that goes along with this
is that x is not a cluster point if
there's some interval and possibly the
only s there is the point x
but nothing else okay
um all right so let's use the
negation of this definition to show that
there are no cluster points okay
and we have to deal with two cases um we
want to show
if x is in r
and x
is not a
cluster point
of s
and i'll just do the case x not equal to
0 x equal to 0 is much easier
so we'll just do x not equal to 0.
let's prove this
um and what's the what's the idea we
have to be able to find so
here's zero this is all that s is it's
just this point zero
now we have a point x
what would be
uh an interval
containing x that contains none of s
so
x here is just uh some non-zero number s
is what's highlighted
the interval around x
that doesn't contain any s
so like x over two
three x over two
meaning delta equals x over two at least
for this picture
yeah
okay and that's and that's essentially
the proof so um
choose delta 0
and
we'll simplify this further and suppose
x is positive for x less than 0 you
choose delta 0 to be the absolute value
of x
but for this one this is simple enough
choose
delta 0 to be x over 2.
then
x minus delta 0 x plus delta 0
is equal to x over
three x over two
um
and
since
zero is not in this set
in this set
implies
intersect s take away
x equals empty
okay
so we had to find a delta so that this
interval around x doesn't contain
anything from s and we've done that by
choosing delta 0 to be x over 2.
okay
so
you know i could have done it for just
uh so i did it for just one so for a set
containing just one element um
[Music]
showed that
this set has no cluster points you can
also show that uh if it has finitely
many points it has no cluster points um
and
so therefore any finite set has no
cluster points but
being a cluster point has nothing to do
with the cardinality so if you see the
example in the notes which you can think
about and i'm not going to go over right
here but for example s equals z
uh the set of integers
this has no cluster points
okay
so
um there you know being a cluster point
means where is the set clustering so it
has nothing necessarily to do with the
size of the set but kind of where the
set is um
taking up space in the real number line
all right so um
with the definition of cluster points
um
so let me first
state the theorem that in fact you
proved
uh
in the assignment which is
that for cluster points um
let s be a subset of r
and x
is a cluster point
of s if and only if
there exists
sequence
xn
of elements of
s take away x
such that xn converges to x
okay and that was in the assignment you
proved that basically using uh the
squeeze
in the definition
all right so with uh the notion of a
cluster point these are
kind of the points in a set where we're
going to start talking about how a
function behaves near a point all right
which is the notion of a limit of a
function
which is our next definition
let s be a subset of r
and even though i was referring to
cluster points earlier as x we're now
going to switch over to c
let's see the
cluster point of s
let f be a function from s to r
right
so
you say f of x converges to l
as x goes to c
so this is the new
terminology here
so here l is a real number if for every
epsilon positive there exists delta
positive
such that
if x is an s
absolute value of x minus c
is bigger than 0
less than delta
then
f of x minus l is less than epsilon so
um
let's uh try and compare this definition
a little bit to what happens for a
sequence so for sequence it's the
sequence is getting close to l
as long as we go far enough out in the
in the sequence as long as we look at
terms far enough out now
for limits of functions that going far
enough out along the sequence is
replaced by
as long as we look close enough to the
point c but not at the point c so
um
[Music]
if you'd like this says that if x
is near c
then so this is just an intuitive
interpretation of what this uh
definition says if x is near c then
f of x is near l
and let me also throw in here that we're
saying that x is neared c
but
not equal to c
okay for a limit
you don't look at what happens at f of c
the function doesn't even need to be
defined there
uh to be able to define what a limit is
we just care about what happens nearby
okay
so
you know you could have
the picture you should have in mind is
that uh your c
and
you know maybe f is not even defined up
to there but
there's f not the graph of the function
f there
there's l and
as long as i get very close to c
i'll be very close to l
very close being
you know measured within some
strip here
okay
okay so
this is the notion of
the limit of
a function as we approach a cluster
point of the set s where the function f
is defined
um
just a little bit of notation
typically write
like we did with sequences f of x
converges to l
as f of x arrow l and then i'll write as
x goes to c maybe i won't write as x
goes to c
and we
denote this by limit of f of x equals l
as well
um
okay so first question about limits
is are they unique
and this is in fact why
we
um require that c be a cluster point of
s because
um
if we didn't require c to be a cluster
point of s in this definition limits
would not be unique in fact you could
have functions converging to
whatever you want because the definition
would then be vacuous but
um
you know if you don't want to think
about that that's fine that's not a big
issue but just uh i'm just going to
point out at one point we're going to
use the fact that c is a cluster point
to prove uh the following theorem
so
let's see be a cluster point
of s
which is a subset of
r
and let f be a function from s to r
if
f of x converges to l one
as x goes to c and
f of x converges to l two as x goes to c
then
a one equals l2
okay so this is what i mean by uh
uniqueness
that uh a function can only have one
limit as it approaches a point c
let me give the proof
so
you know we're going to play this game
again where instead of showing something
is zero or something is equal to
something else directly we'll give
ourselves a little room and prove the
following
will instead show that uh
for all epsilon positive
l1 minus l2
is less than epsilon
so
l1 and l2 these are just two fixed uh
real numbers if their absolute value is
less than epsilon for arbitrary epsilon
then
this is a number which is smaller than
any
positive real number that implies that
that number is zero so l1 equals l2 okay
um
why we give ourselves a little room is
because in the definition
we have a small parameter there which we
hope to use
so um
so let's prove this
epsilon be positive
so since
f of x converges to l1
there exists so so just from the
definition
given some small tolerance i can find a
little number delta so that if i look
inside this interval i get mapped to
the interval l plus epsilon l minus
epsilon so there exists a delta one
positive
such that
if x is an s and i'm going to probably
keep forgetting to write that but that
should be understood that x is in the
domain of the function f
if x minus c is less than
uh delta one and bigger than 0
then
f of x minus
is less than epsilon
over 2.
okay and then the same thing for um l2 i
mean if f of x is converging to l two
then
there exists a delta two so that i have
the same statement so instead i'm i'm
just gonna change this one
to
i
i and here i equals 1 2.
so
since f of x converges to each of these
two numbers l one and l two there exists
a delta one and a delta two so that
if i'm within this tolerance delta of
one or delta two then f of x minus delta
one uh l1 or l2 is less than epsilon
over 2.
let delta be the minimum of these two
numbers
now since
c is a
cluster point of s
in fact does equal there does exist an x
uh in s
such that 0 is bigger than x minus c
is less than delta
all right
and i'm going to use this x to compare
l1 and l2
then
since x uh is in this interval or i
should say since it's uh
so remember i have this
which means i have this inequality
for i equals 1 2.
i get f of x i should say
l1 minus l2 this is equal to if i add
and subtract f of x
and now use the triangle inequality
and use the inequality that's in green
the f of x minus l one is less than
epsilon over two
uh and same for l2 i get
equals epsilon okay and that's the end
because remember we started off with
um the absolute value of l1 minus l2
are there any questions about that
okay so
uh
not the most exciting theorem in the
world that uh
you know this thing that we've defined
the limit is uniquely
is a unique thing for a function
but let's start looking at some examples
and at one point we'll look at the
negation of this definition
so
let's suppose so let's look at the limit
as x goes to c
of the
function ax plus b
and i claim this is equal to ac
plus b
okay so here s is
although i didn't write it out this
function ax plus b this is uh i'm
looking at
it defined on all of r
and c is a real number
okay
so we have to verify this definition
and since it's uh for every epsilon
there exists something the beginning of
every proof i'll give you a few points
if you can just say let epsilon be
positive
how will we choose delta well you do
kind of
similar
computations as you would if you were
doing epsilon m arguments for
sequences so
what are we after we want to find
delta so that
x minus c
less than delta and also bigger than 0
implies
f of x which is ax plus b minus
ac plus b
is less than epsilon
so
uh let's start off with this thing play
with it and see if we can find how to
choose delta
remember we don't solve this inequality
we want to find how to choose delta
based on
you know estimating this thing
and trying to make it less than epsilon
so
f of x minus
ac plus b
an absolute value
this is equal to if you just plug in
f of x equals ax plus b
this equals
a times x minus c
which equals
absolute value of a times x minus c and
now we're in business because the thing
that we do have control over is the
delta
right is
how big x minus c is so this is less
than
absolute value of a times delta if x
minus c is less than delta
and remember the thing that we want
in the end
is the thing
in yellow and the thing we get to
control is the thing in green
so
uh if i want the thing in yellow and i
have the thing in green
how do i choose delta
so in the end right i want f of x minus
ac plus b to be less than epsilon right
now i'm at
um the absolute value of a times delta
delta is the thing i get to play with
two so how do i choose it
epsilon to be absolute value
right because if i choose delta this way
then x minus c
less than delta implies that just by
this computation
here
i would get epsilon in the end
yeah
so
that's kind of the scratch work that
goes into it again delta is the thing
you get to choose you get to
choose based on epsilon
and
so you look at f of x minus ac plus b
you estimate it to be no bigger than
the absolute value of a times x minus c
which is less than the absolute value of
a times delta and so if you want that
thing to be less than epsilon you should
choose for example delta to be epsilon
over the absolute value of a there's not
a unique choice i could have chosen
delta to be epsilon over 2 absolute
value of a
[Music]
but this is a choice okay
so let epsilon be positive
choose delta to be
epsilon over absolute value of a
if
x minus c is less than delta
then
and when you write the proof you know
it's essentially a rehashing of the best
parts of your computation
and f of x minus
a times c plus b
this is equal to
absolute value of a times x minus c
so if we take f of x and subtract our
proposed limit ac plus b we get the
absolute value of a times absolute value
of x minus c which is less than the
absolute value of a times delta which
equals
epsilon since we chose delta to be
epsilon over a
okay
that's the that's the proof
there any questions
okay so let's do uh let's do another
example
let's look at the limit as x goes to c
of square of the function square root of
x
and i'm going to show this is equal to
square root of c
and here
although i'm not writing it s will be
for us
the domain of the square root
which is uh the closed interval 0
infinity not including infinity of
course but
um
and for what i'm going to do c is
positive okay you can also do c equal to
zero
uh but for this proof i'm gonna do c
positive
all right
so i have to verify this definition
which means for every delta i mean for
every epsilon i can find a delta so let
epsilon be positive let's go over to our
box
of
uh scribbling and
scratching so remember our goal is to
find a delta
which i can choose so that f of x minus
the square root of c in this case is
less than epsilon so if i look at
f of x minus
square root of c this is square root of
x
minus square root of c
and perhaps you remember from your days
in calculus that whenever you see the
difference of two square roots
it's um a good idea maybe to multiply
the top and
bottom or i guess multiply by one in a
very special way so that i get the
difference of squares so this is equal
to the square root of x minus square
root of c
times square root of x plus square root
of c
all over
square root of x plus square root of c
okay and so now i have
uh on the top i have
uh product a minus b times a plus b so
that's the difference of squares which
gives me x minus c on top over
square root of x plus square root of c
okay
um
and remember this is less than
the
thing that we're going to choose in the
end the absolute value of x minus c is
going to is less than delta so this is
less than square root of x plus square
root of c now in the end you have to
only
you can choose delta depending only on
epsilon and maybe the point c okay
you cannot choose it to be
dependent on the point x which is
changing right
uh what maybe you're tempted to do here
is to then choose
delta to be
uh square root of x plus square root of
c
times epsilon
don't do that
okay
because delta again only depends on the
point c and the point epsilon it cannot
depend on the thing that's changing
which is x right this is changing
so uh
you can't you don't make this choice
now if we just do one more thing then
we'll get to something where we can
choose an independent of the thing
that's changing x
the square root of x on the bottom is
only making things smaller
right because that's not negative so
this is less than or equal to delta over
square root of c
okay
so now in the end i have something which
is delta and depends on the point c so
and i want f of x minus square root of c
to be less than epsilon so how should i
choose delta
shout it if you know it
right epsilon times the square root of c
so now uh this will be our our choice so
choose delta to be
epsilon times square root of c
now we have to show this delta works
which is essentially again just
rehashing our computation over on the
right
which gave us how to choose delta than
if
the absolute value of x minus c is less
than delta
f of x minus
square root of c and i'm not going to
write f of x i'm going to write the
square root of x
is equal to
basically what we did over here in the
box which is the absolute value of x
minus c
over square root of x plus square root
of c
which is less than
or equal to if i take away the square
root of x on the bottom like we did
before which is less than delta or
square root of c
which equals epsilon square root of c
over square root of c which equals
epsilon
so this delta works
okay are there any questions about that
example
okay um
so
let's do one more example which really
illustrates uh what i was getting at
when i was talking about the limit only
cares about
uh
what the function is doing near a point
but not at the point so let's say we
look at the function f of x given by
uh one
if x
equals zero and two
if x does not equal zero
okay so this is
um
here's the point zero
and
for x not equal to 0 is equal to 2
[Music]
at x equals 0 it's equal to 1.
all right
and i claim that the limit as x goes to
zero of f of x this equals two
and the thing to note is
that this
limit does not equal
f of 0
which it did for the previous two cases
right if we look back at these two
examples that we did a minute a
minute ago the limit as x goes to c of
both of these examples was i just plug
in c to the function right
um
but for this example that's not the case
right the exam the limit is not equal to
the function evaluated at the point
again highlighting
that limits don't care about the
function evaluated at the point they
care about what's happening
near the point okay and near the point f
of x is just equal to two identically
okay
so
i'll give you the quick proof or you can
completely ignore it and just believe
that uh
the limit as uh x goes to zero of this
function equals two
so
the point is is that for x not equal to
zero f of x is just a constant two so
let epsilon be positive
and you can choose delta to be whatever
you like because
f of x when x is not equal to zero is
going to be equal to 2 the proposed
limit
then if 0
is bigger than the absolute value of x
minus 0 which is just x is less than
delta
then this implies x is not equal to 0.
and therefore if i look at f of x
minus two this is just two minus two
equals zero
which is less than epsilon
uh any questions about this example
[Music]
no questions
all right so
um
what we'll talk about now is so before
this
section on continuous functions or at
least this section on the limits of
functions we had the notion of limits of
sequences
and so a natural question is how do
um limits of functions and limits of
sequences um
[Music]
belong together interact um
relate to each other i guess is the best
uh best way to phrase that question
um
and the point is is that
to decide if a function has a limit it
suffices to stick in sequences that
converge to that uh point that you're
looking at okay and that's the content
of the next theorem so
let us be a subset of r
see
cluster point of
s
let f be a function from s to r
then um
the limit exists limit as x goes to c of
f of x
equals a number l
this is equivalent to
the statement that for every
sequence x of n
of elements of s take away c
such that x n converges to c
we have
f of x n converges to
l okay so again the statement of this
theorem is that um
a function converges to l if and only if
for every sequence i stick into the
function which converges to c f of x n
converges to l
okay so to
choose or to decide if a function
converges it suffices to look at c
convergence of certain sequences okay
okay
and
you know why is this theorem important
or at least very useful it's because
um
with the serum we now get basically uh
every analog of theorems we proved for
sequences for free okay for example
limits of sums of functions
uh
a squeeze theorem that's uh
you know can be stated for limits
um
functions and so on and i'll say a few
comments about this after we prove the
theorem
all right so let's uh this is a two-way
street so
um and i'm gonna mark
the second statement in green
that way i don't have to rewrite it
again
so
first assume
that
limit as x goes to c of f of x equals l
and now we want to prove the statement
in green
okay
so here's uh here's the idea
so now we want to show so
that xn
the sequence of elements
and s take away c
such that x of n converges to c
and what we want to show
is that f of x n
which is now a
a new sequence
converges to l
as n goes to infinity
okay so here i should write as
n goes to infinity in here
okay
um
so let me move that and let me draw
kind of the picture of why
you should believe this
so remember what it means for a sequence
to converge to a number means for every
epsilon there is a capital m so that for
all n bigger than or equal to capital m
the sequence is
close to the number l within epsilon
distance to it
so let's um
let's think about this a little bit
i'm not going to draw i'm not going to
draw the graph i'm just going to
draw two
copies of the number line
here we have
number l
here's the number
c and
plus epsilon
or minus epsilon so
let epsilon be positive
and
the idea is we want to be able to find
or say there exists a natural number
capital m so that n bigger than or equal
to capital m implies f of x n is inside
this interval here
now
since um f x converges to l
as x converges to c
there exists a delta
so that
this is the picture that goes along with
it
so that
if i'm inside this interval here
then i get mapped into this interval
here this is what i get from the
assumption
so then how i should choose uh the
natural number capital m is so that all
of the x sub n's
lie in this interval c minus delta c
plus delta
and if i can arrange that which i can
because the x of n's converge to c
then i will get that these guys
get mapped into this interval l plus
epsilon l minus epsilon
okay and that's the whole idea of the
proof now we just need to write it down
since f of x converges to l
there exists a delta positive
such that if
less than delta then
f of x minus l is less than epsilon
that's what i drew in in yellow there
now since
the sequence x of n
equals c
this implies that there exists some
natural number m sub zero
such that
all n bigger than or equal to m sub 0
and since all of these x sub n's are not
equal to c by assumption they're in the
the set s take away c
x sub n minus c and absolute value is
bigger than zero and less than delta
okay
this follows from the definition of
convergence uh
of sequences to a point here if you'd
like i'm choosing epsilon in that
definition to be delta and this delta is
coming from
the definition for convergence of
functions
um
so we'll choose capital m to be
this integer m sub zero
and if n is bigger than or equal to m
[Music]
i get that
by our choice of it being m sub zero i
get that x of n minus c
is less than delta that means that it
falls in this little yellow highlighted
part uh
in the first number line
which implies
so here what i'm using
is what's highlighted in blue so this is
content of this implication
implies that f
of x n minus l
is less than epsilon
all right and that's that's what we
wanted to do right we wanted to show
that
there exists some natural number m so
that n bigger than or equal to m implies
f of x n minus l is less than epsilon
and absolute value
and therefore
we've proved that the limit as n goes to
infinity of the sequence f of x then
equals l
okay so that's one direction of this if
and only if statement let's prove the
opposite direction
so
suppose
what's highlighted in green holds
okay
and
this proof is going to be by
contradiction so let's suppose that what
hold what uh that our assumption what
what's in green holds but the limit as x
goes to c of f of x does not equal l
so now we're going to do the proof by
contradiction
meaning suppose the outcome is false
okay
we're still assuming what's in green
holds that's our assumption and we're
we're proof of by contradiction we
assume that the outcome or or the
conclusion is false which is that the
limit of as x goes to c of f of x does
not equal l
um
now what does what does this mean so now
we get to negate the definition and get
better acquainted with it
this means
that so the definition of limit if you
go back to the notes
is a for all epsilon there exists a
delta statement
so
the negation is that there exists some
bad epsilon epsilon zero
such that for all
delta
positive
there exists
an x
such that
x is close to c
but as far f of x is far away from l
okay
so the negation of the definition of
limit of something being the limit is
that there exists a bad epsilon so that
no matter how close i get to c
i can find something very close to c
that's far away from l if i stick it
into f
okay
that's the um
intuitive uh way of viewing the negation
of this definition
all right
okay so now i'm gonna apply this
with delta
[Music]
chosen to be one over n for n a natural
number okay
so
then this says uh so this statement
here
is a for all delta statement so
[Music]
it holds for every delta i
pick so for all in a natural number
uh there exists
an x of n
such that zero is bigger than x sub n
minus c is less than delta i'm going to
pick to be one over n
and f of x sub n minus l is less is
bigger than or equal to epsilon zero so
first off
i made a for all in statement let's
think about this for just a second so
certainly for delta equals one i can
find a number x sub one
satisfying
zero is less than x minus c is less than
one and f of x minus f of x sub one
minus l is bigger than or equal to
epsilon zero
but delta can be anything i choose so
for delta equal a half i can find an x
sub 2 such that x sub 2 minus c is less
than one half
and f of x minus l is bigger than or
equal to epsilon zero so i'm just
choosing delta to be one over n
for each in a natural number
using delta to be one over n
okay
is this point clear
please stop me if you have uh if you
have questions and something is not
clear
okay so i have this sequence
of elements of s that are not equal to c
because they're an absolute value bigger
than uh
0 or the absolute value of x of n minus
c is bigger than zero
and they satisfy this and equal these
two inequalities okay
then let me just write this inequality
again
so
so then the equality the inequality that
i have is for all n the natural number
zero is less than x sub n minus c is
less than one over n
um i claim that the x of n's must then
converge to c
what uh what
tool can i use to say that
squeeze theorem okay
because this thing on the left zero this
if you like is a sequence just a
constant sequence this converges to zero
and one over n
something on the right converges to zero
as n goes to infinity so that implies
the thing that's sandwiched in between
gets squeezed to zero so that implies
limit as n goes to infinity of x of n
minus c
equals 0
ie
x ends converge to c
now
i'm assuming
what's in green holds right which is if
i take any sequence converging to c
f of x n has to converge to l
okay
so by
what's in green is giving me this
implication
0 must be equal
to limit as n goes to infinity of f of x
of n
minus l
but
what i know is that
since i've assumed f of x is not
converged to l along this sequence each
of these guys is bigger than or equal to
epsilon naught
which is positive
so now i've concluded that 0 is bigger
than zero
that's a contradiction
okay
okay so next time uh
we'll talk about applications of this
theorem uh do you have any questions
about uh this proof for or anything that
we've covered
so far today
so
i mean how you get the choice of delta
from doing
right
um
so let me phrase this uh
yeah i mean so
you know i probably in most
classes you would just be given this
proof that's over here on the left
and somehow it looks like magic that i
chose this delta this way
and it ends up working
right
um but the thinking that goes in behind
it is
um
so what's the thing you want you want
what's in yellow okay so let me erase
some of what's in yellow
you want to choose delta so that
if you take f of x minus ac plus b that
thing an absolute value will be less
than epsilon okay
so
start with that thing that you want to
make small
that you want to ensure is small f of x
minus ac plus b
and start computing
and when you compute it you get the
what we got here in the second uh bit of
yellow
okay and we're assuming that the
absolute value of x minus c is less than
delta all right we're trying to choose
delta so that what's in green implies
what's in yellow okay so far we haven't
chosen delta we just know that the
absolute the absolute value of x minus c
will be less than delta
and we want to choose delta so that that
implies
um
what's in yellow uh after the arrow
there
so when we do this computation
in assuming that the absolute value of x
minus c is less than delta we get
this thing right here
the absolute value of a times delta this
is just assuming that the absolute value
of x minus c is less than delta which is
what
what we'll be assuming
so and we want what's in yellow which is
that thing to be less than epsilon so
what we've arrived at is
this thing here which we want less than
epsilon is less than this thing in red
okay
and therefore we want to choose the
delta so that the thing in red is less
than epsilon or less than or equal to
epsilon that will tell that will ensure
that f of x minus
ac plus b and absolute value will be
less than epsilon
okay so i'm not solving an inequality
you know i'm not solving the inequality
i want which is f of x minus ac plus b
i'm starting with what's on the left
estimating it using my assumptions and
then at the end choosing delta so that i
come up with epsilon in the end
so
in the
last step i have absolute value of a
times delta
and i want that to be less than epsilon
so i could have chosen
you know delta to be less than epsilon
over
less than or equal to epsilon over a
so anything any delta like that would
have worked so i could have put
delta to be epsilon over 2a that still
would have worked or 3a
okay um
so um
yeah it's what they're green that's the
thing we're
doing
we get to use
in this computation
are there any other questions
this is a
this is a style thing all right so for
out throughout this entire um semester
you know
for all epsilon you have to be able to
find uh m
so that something happens right so at
some point you always
say choose m to be something right maybe
it's the maximum of some m0 m1 that you
had
or
choose m to be once so that one over m
is less than epsilon or something like
that so i'm just sticking with
that uh
style of saying choose m to be this
otherwise i could have said
um
there exists a capital number m
so that for all n bigger than or equal
to capital m
uh x sub n minus c is less than delta
and then move to the next part but you
know throughout the course i've always
like uh at least in the proof so i
presented you know you're making a
choice of capital
m right you're always it's for all
epsilon there exists a capital m so that
means you have to tell me how to choose
capital m it's the same thing with these
you know epsilon delta proofs is that
for all epsilon there exists a delta so
at some point you have to tell me how to
choose delta in the proof
so i'm just kind of stuck with that
style of saying choose m to be something
although you're absolutely right that i
could have just said for all n bigger
than or equal to capital m 0 i have what
i want and therefore you know implicitly
i'm i'm saying that
m equals m 0 is the thing that works
yeah that's the same delta
[Music]
you